---
blog-title: In Conversation with Sooraj Ben, IFS: A Journey of Passion, Perseverance, and Conservation
blog-date: June 1, 2025
blog-author: Gouri Kartha
blog-image: images/blog2.jpeg
---

Sooraj Ben K.R. is an Indian Forest Service (IFS) officer from Mannur, Muvattupuzha, Kerala. He secured All India Rank 1 in the 2020 UPSC IFS Examination conducted by the Union Public Service Commission. Born on September 28, 1993, he completed his Master’s in Chemistrywith Biology as a minor from IISER Thiruvananthapuram. Before joining the IFS, he cleared the 2018 UPSC Civil Services Exam with an AIR of 321 and served in the Indian Ordnance Factories Service. His passion for forest conservation grew during an internship at the Theni Forest Division, inspiring him to pursue a career in the IFS.

## What made you choose IFS as your career

I studied in the Indian Institutes of Science Education and Research (IISER), Trivandrum and during the course of my studies I was indulged in a summer internship where I worked at various places like Theni forest region and Kulathupuzha forest division as an ecologist. Though I had interest, I never thought I would end up in IFS. I had commonly prepared for IAS and IFS. But as IFS had a higher cut off I couldn’t clear it in the initial two attempts. Third time, though I cleared the cut off due to certain other factors I thought I’ll solely concentrate on IFS. And that’s how I ended up in IFS.

## How was your journey to the first rank?  How was your preparations for it?

Basically I don’t think it’s possible to prepare for a first rank because for any competitive exam, there are a lot of people working hard. So there were no preparations aiming for the first rank, but I wanted to get into the service because I really thought it is a place I would love. Wildlife, nature and everything that is associated with this department is something I enjoy and that’s how I planned to take up IFS. And honestly first rank was an accident. I knew I had done well in the exam and the interview but I never thought about first rank until that moment. The preparations obviously were really good. For the mains, that is the second exam for IFS after the prelims, I entirely dedicated my two months to studies, where I spend a whole day in the library to refer books. I prepared to get into the service but first rank was a happy accident.

## In the time of digitization, most of the youngsters are carried away by the excessive use of Social Media. How did you keep Social Media away during your preparation for exams?

During those times I didn’t have an Instagram account but I had Facebook and WhatsApp and I was an active user of Facebook. So during my preparation, I deactivated my account because I knew even if I uninstalled the app I’ll log on to it through my laptop. Also I didn’t use WhatsApp for a year and all important communication was done via call. I first got away with that fear of missing out, the feeling that if I don’t use social media I’m missing out on something. And somehow that worked well for me as I never felt like reinstalling it. And it was after I joined the services that I installed social media again. As advice I would say *“Anything that you use ,be it social media or anything else should be used by you and not the apps using you. And it is when these apps use you, that it becomes a burden for you. Let it be friendships, relationships or anything. Anything is good until you’re using it. When it becomes vice versa it becomes a burden.”*

## Could you please suggest a few best practices of yours to the budding IAS, IFS aspirants?

I don’t know if it will work for everyone but during my preparations, I had a daily tracker board, where I noted down my day to day activities  with check boxes and I made sure to tick 8 tasks everyday before sleep which gives a sense of satisfaction which is better compared to the cheap level of satisfaction we attain from social media. And if you’re someone who hasn’t tried meditation yet I would highly recommend it. We often look down at the importance of meditation especially during our college days. But I would say that will help you a lot.

## Having an educational background in Science, How do you perceive the future of Ecotourism in Kerala?

Ecotourism in Kerala is bound to increase because people are entrepreneurial and there is a lot of scope for it. But from a science perspective I would say ecotourism is a much misused term in Kerala. It is difficult to define ecotourism. I would say conducting tourism in a sustainable way is the base of ecotourism but in reality this is rarely followed. When we visit any ecotourism sites of Kerala, we see a lot of garbage thrown carelessly. It is only when civic sense is included that it becomes real. Ecotourism development should take place after thorough study of the capacity or else it will be a huge harm to forest and wildlife. Obviously we need to improve our tourism which will potentially improve the money we get from it and it should be based on a scientific study.

## IAS,IFS officers have to often face the issue of frequent transfers. How is it  affecting your productivity and vision ?

*“I think it’s too early for me too comment on it as I have got transfer only once. But I think yes it does affect your personal life as you have to move away from your family, right now I’m staying alone as my family is at my native place but at the same time its part of the job and you have to accept it and you have to adjust to it. How quick you get adjusted to it, gives you the opportunity to develop and grow”. And in a way these constant transfers make this job interesting because by the time you get bored at the same place you get the opportunity to explore new places, new people and new challenges.”*

## The Forest Department has a huge responsibility to preserve the Adivasi culture,their skill-set and traditions. What are the various steps taken?

We have a tribal affairs department both at the state as well as central level so they are the primary caregivers to the tribal community. But the forest department has a very important role to play as most tribal groups live in the forest region so the forest department interacts the most with them often more than the tribal affairs officers. What we do is, we help them in a few ways. First, there is a non interference in their culture and traditions. For example, there is [Forest Rights Act 2006](https://tribal.nic.in/FRA.aspx) and under the community rights they can go into the forest and indulge in their traditional activities like collecting honey from the forest. So this helps them to preserve their culture. And along with that we provide them jobs, mostly in forests. For example in the [Parambikulam Tiger Reserve](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parambikulam_Tiger_Reserve) there is a tribal dance conducted every evening for the guests where the performers are paid by the reserve, this way their traditional dance and songs are preserved and also the guests are exposed to their culture as well. This is how the tribal community is helped without disturbing their traditions.

## Since the government gives significant importance to protection of the Indian Knowledge system, Can you suggest some uniqueness found in the flora fauna of forests in Kerala?

Kerala is very unique in terms of its ecology, flora and fauna and there are several unique ecosystems in Kerala which is not found in any other part of the world. For example the [Shola forests](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shola) which is exclusively found in the western ghats, are filled with short trees found on hills. As we go up the hill, at a point it becomes grasslands, and that’s why it’s known as Shola forests. Many water bodies originate from these forests. Another extremely unique Eco system is the [Myristica swamp](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Myristica_swamp), that is found in Kerala and northern Karnataka. Myristica is similar to mangrove but while mangroves grow in saline water, Myristica grows in freshwater. Unique trees grow in this region. There are many such unique spots. [Mahabali frog](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Purple_frog) is a very interesting species. Like the [‘Mahabali’](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahabali) from mythology the frog comes out from mud once a year to breed and returns afterward and it looks unique too. There are a lot of such species that are endemic and vulnerable. And in that sense Kerala is very rich.

## Last year, Times Of India had reported that 89k Hectares of land was diverted for development projects in the past 5 years. Is it a concern for us?What is your take on it?

In my point of view you should look at this from a broader perspective, The fact that 85K hectares are used for development is a concern but there is, the [India Forest Conservation Act](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forest_Conservation_Act,_1980). In 1980 a lot of forest area was converted for the development process, seeing that the then Prime Minister, Ms.Indira Gandhi brought this act for forest conservation. The speciality of this act is, it contains only five articles and is a simple act. The most powerful section says that *“The forests should not be converted for any other purposes”*. Now, while the forest areas are converted another land which was not a forest before is converted into a forest. This is the basic condition followed, so in this case when the 85k hectares are used, they would have converted another 85k hectares into forest. But it becomes a concern when the ecosystems are vulnerable. Like the recently devastated Wayanad, those areas are highly vulnerable and mild disturbances can cause major havoc. *“We cannot prevent development projects because India is a developing country and should grow. For example, 6 lane roads are coming up in Kerala, from Kasargod to Trivandrum which should have come up ten years ago. So these projects cannot be avoided but a balance should be brought for environment conservation“*. As students what you should be thinking is there are some very unique ecosystems and development projects shouldn’t disrupt these ecosystems. Such developmental projects take place from greed and will result in major consequences. But there are places where development is a necessity. For example, a person in the cities can enjoy high speed internet but a person at a remote place doesnt enjoy the same, which reduces their opportunities. So as everyone deserves equal opportunity development is necessary. So development has to be looked on from that perspective.

## What are some of the successful ecotourism initiatives in the state?

There are many successful ecotourism initiatives in Kerala carried out by the forest department as well as Kerala Tourism Corporation. But personally I feel some good initiatives are from the forest department. I think [Periyar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Periyar_National_Park) is a really good model. At Periyar the ecotourism is carried out by 72 Eco development committees consisting of traditional localities who were dependent on the forest for livelihood and they carry out this tourism. They are provided a salary from tourism and they also get benefits like sending their children to school.So I feel, Periyar is where ecotourism is conducted at its best. Also people who were once poachers are brought into this initiative who now act for the conservation of these areas which is a really interesting and happy thing. There are other good models like the one in [Eravikulam national park](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eravikulam_National_Park) too.

## If you could leave a lasting message about environmental conservation, what would it be? 

Environment conservation is the duty and responsibility of all citizens. There is often a feeling that only the elite classes are responsible for it. Personally speaking I would say my parents are the biggest environmental conservationists i have seen in my life. They brought in biodiversity in my surrounding.With multiple species biodiversity is created by our parents. This is a tradition followed in Kerala which is fading these days. *“Environmental conservation need not be huge protests but can be a simple move like not killing a snake you see in your garden instead you can call a [Sarpa volunteer](https://forest.kerala.gov.in/en/sarpa/)“*. So instead of killing a snake you can call a Sarpa volunteer who’ll come to collect the snake within half an hour. And will be left in a forest area. Even this simple act is environmental conservation. *“You needn’t be an activist to conserve nature, you just have to be a good human being to be an environmental conservationist. And I believe every human being has that part in them but it’s really difficult to get that call from ourselves. In our inner being we all know we have to protect nature but often we ignore this call. Environment conservation need not be big things, it can be simple things like not killing a snake in your garden.”*


Sooraj Ben K.R.’s journey to becoming an Indian Forest Service (IFS) officer is an inspiring testament to perseverance, passion, and dedication. From his early academic pursuits at IISER Thiruvananthapuram to his transformative experiences during internships in forest regions, his path was shaped by a deep love for nature and wildlife. His insights on exam preparation, social media discipline, and meditation offer valuable lessons to aspirants. Furthermore, his views on ecotourism, environmental conservation, and sustainable development highlight his commitment to balancing progress with nature preservation. His message is clear — *”environmental conservation is a responsibility that begins with small actions, and every individual can contribute to a better, greener future”*.